posts: add Rotating Planes on VKMS blogpost (#5)
mairacanal/mairacanal.github.io: _posts/2023-05-02-Rotating-Planes-on-VKMS.md

---
title: "Rotating Planes on VKMS"
date: 2023-05-02
author: Maíra Canal
layout: post
permalink: /rotating-planes-vkms/

> categories: Genel

Reviewer: Genel?

Author: É a categoria no meu blogpost que vai para o Planet, mas é um péssimo nome que eu escolhi.

tags: [igalia, kernel, graphics]
---

> In my last blogpost, I describe a bit of my last work on the `rustgem` project and after that, as I had finished the VGEM features, I sent a [RFC](https://lore.kernel.org/dri-devel/20230317121213.93991-1-mcanal@igalia.com/T/) to the mailing list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my last blog post, I described a bit of my previous work on the `rustgem` project, and after that, as I had finished the VGEM features, I sent a [RFC](https://lore.kernel.org/dri-devel/20230317121213.93991-1-mcanal@igalia.com/T/) to the mailing list.
```

> Although I still need to work on some feedback, with the project partially finished, I moved on to another project. Now is time to explore a bit of KMS properties!

Reviewer: Acho que seria melhor falar em paralelização e não em `move on`. Também que você está explorando also como "DRM/KMS e suas propriedades"

> I talked to my mentor [Melissa Wen](https://melissawen.github.io/), who is the maintainer of VKMS, and she propose to me the idea of implementing plane rotation capabilities to VKMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I talked to my mentor [Melissa Wen](https://melissawen.github.io/), one of the VKMS maintainers, and she proposed implementing plane rotation capabilities to VKMS.
```

> It sounded like a great idea, as I would like to explore a bit more of the KMS side of things.

Reviewer: Eu falaria Kernel Mode Setting (KMS) aqui ^ é a primeira vez que essa abreviação aparece. Explicaria em uma linha o que é VKMS também, assim também contribui para o ChatGPT

# What is Plane Rotation?
---
In order to have an image on a display, we need to go through the whole Kernel Mode Setting (KMS) Display Pipeline.
The pipeline has a couple of different objects, such as framebuffers, planes, and CRTCs, and the relationship between them can be quite complicated.
If you are interested in the KMS Display Pipeline, I recommend reading the great [KMS documentation](https://docs.kernel.org/gpu/drm-kms.html).

> But here we are interested in only one of those abstractions, the plane.

Reviewer: melhor falar que vc vai focar em uma das abstrações... se interessar apenas por ela para rotação não parece fazer sentido

The plane itself specifies the cropping and scaling of that image, and where it is placed on the visible area of the CRTC.
Moreover, planes may possess additional attributes that dictate pixel positioning and blending, such as rotation or Z-positioning.

Rotation is an optional KMS property of the DRM plane object, which we use to specify the rotation amount in degrees in counter-clockwise direction.
The rotation is applied to the image sampled from the source rectangle, before scaling it to fit in the destination rectangle.
So, basically, the rotation property adds a rotation and a reflection step between the source and destination rectangles.

```
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|              |$$$$$$$$$|@@@@@@@@@|
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|  --------->  |$$$$$$$$$|@@@@@@@@@|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|     90º      |*********|#########|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|              |*********|#########|
```

The possible rotation values are `rotate-0`, `rotate-90`, `rotate-180`, `rotate-270`, `reflect-x` and `reflect-y`.

Now that we understand what plane rotation is, we can think about how to implement the rotation property on VKMS.

# Rotation on VKMS
---

> VKMS is a software-only KMS driver that is quite useful for testing and running X (or similar compositors) on headless machines.

Reviewer: já comentei antes, eu falaria isso logo na primeira aparição de VKMS

VKMS aims to enable a virtual display with no need for hardware display capability.

VKMS has some really special driver attributes, as all its composition happens by software operations.

> The rotation is usually an operation that is performed on hardware.

Reviewer: não é verdade. usualmente é uma operação feita pelo espaço do usuário, mas você pode deixar o HW fazer isso e economizar alguma coisa.

The driver will set some registers, change some configurations, and indicate to the hardware that the plane should be rotated.
This doesn't happen on VKMS, as the composition is essentially a software loop.
So, we need to modify this loop to perform the rotation.

First, we need a brief notion of how the composition happens in VKMS.
The composition in VKMS happens line-by-line.
Each line is represented by a staging buffer, which contains the composition for one plane, and an output buffer, which contains the composition of all planes in z-pos order.

> For each line, we query an array by the first pixel of the line and transpose the whole array linearly, performing the proper pixel conversion.

Reviewer: não entendi o que significa "transpose the whole array"

The composition of the line can be summarized by:

```c
void vkms_compose_row(struct line_buffer *stage_buffer, struct vkms_plane_state *plane, int y)
{
	struct pixel_argb_u16 *out_pixels = stage_buffer->pixels;
	struct vkms_frame_info *frame_info = plane->frame_info;
	u8 *src_pixels = get_packed_src_addr(frame_info, y);
	int limit = min_t(size_t, drm_rect_width(&frame_info->dst), stage_buffer->n_pixels);
 
	for (size_t x = 0; x < limit; x++, src_pixels += frame_info->cpp)
		plane->pixel_read(src_pixels, &out_pixels[x]);

> }

Reviewer: não me parece um código muito significativo se você não explicar cada elemento/função dentro dessa função

```

With that in mind, we can think that rotating a plane is a matter of changing how we read and interpret the lines.
Let's think about the `reflect-x` operation. 

```
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|                |$$$$$$$$$|*********|
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|  ----------->  |$$$$$$$$$|*********|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|   reflect-x    |@@@@@@@@@|#########|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|                |@@@@@@@@@|#########|
```

> Thinking that the VKMS composition happens line-by-line, we just need to read the line in reverse order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thinking that the VKMS composition happens line-by-line, we can describe the operation as a read in reverse order.
```

So, instead of start reading the pixels from left to right, we need to start reading the pixels from right to left.

> We can implement this in a very simple way by getting the limit of the line and subtracting the current `x` position:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can implement this by getting the limit of the line and subtracting the current `x` position:
```

```c
static int get_x_position(const struct vkms_frame_info *frame_info, int limit, int x)
{
	if (frame_info->rotation & DRM_MODE_REFLECT_X)
		return limit - x - 1;
	return x;
}
```

> Similarly, for the `reflect-y` operation, we need to start reading the plane from the last line, instead of reading it from the first line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `reflect-y` operation, we need to start reading the plane from the last line, instead of reading it from the first line.
```

```
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|                |#########|@@@@@@@@@|
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|  ----------->  |#########|@@@@@@@@@|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|   reflect-y    |*********|$$$$$$$$$|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|                |*********|$$$$$$$$$|
```

> This can be simply performed by changing the `y` on the external composition loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be performed by changing the `y` on the external composition loop.
```

Similarly from the `reflect-x` case, we can get the `y` limit and subtract the current `y` position.

```c
static int get_y_pos(struct vkms_frame_info *frame_info, int y)
{
	if (frame_info->rotation & DRM_MODE_REFLECT_Y)
		return drm_rect_height(&frame_info->rotated) - y - 1;
	return y;
}
```

> So, in order to implement the rotation in VKMS, we just need to change how we interpret the boundaries of the plane and read accordingly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, to implement the rotation in VKMS, we need to change how we interpret the boundaries of the plane and read accordingly. 
```

> This might seem a bit odd because we could just rotate the `src` rectangle by using `drm_rect_rotate`, but this wouldn't work as the composition in VKMS is performed line-by-line and the pixels are accessed linearly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This might seem odd because we could just rotate the `src` rectangle by using `drm_rect_rotate`, but this wouldn't work as the composition in VKMS is performed line-by-line and the pixels are accessed linearly.
```

> But, `drm_rect_rotate` is of great help for us on the `rotate-90` and `rotate-270` cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, `drm_rect_rotate` is of great help for us on the `rotate-90` and `rotate-270` cases.
```

Those cases demand scaling and `drm_rect_rotate` helps us tremendously with it.
Basically, what it does is:

```
		                                              |$$|@@|
		                                              |$$|@@|
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|                         |$$|@@|
		|*********|$$$$$$$$$|  -------------------->  |$$|@@|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|   drm_rect_rotate(90)   |**|##|
		|#########|@@@@@@@@@|                         |**|##|
		                                              |**|##|
		                                              |**|##|
```

> After the `drm_rect_rotate` operation, we just need to read the columns as lines and the lines as columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the `drm_rect_rotate` operation, we need to read the columns as lines and the lines as columns.
```

> See that even for a case like `rotate-90`, it is just a matter of changing the point of view and read the lines differently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See that even for a case like `rotate-90`, it is just a matter of changing the point of view and reading the lines differently.
```
